A16 Early Streaming & Release Notes
Hey Survivalists,
Here are the release notes for the upcoming Alpha 16 release. We know you folks like to read them beforehand so we’re releasing them early. In the meantime, you can watch our Streaming Partners play it Now!

They will be giving away keys and you may even see a developer or two show up.

Streaming Partners

Alpha 16 Official Release Notes!

This update is the most ambitious update for us since Alpha 1 and by far has the largest framework changes we’ve ever done. And to top that off it’s the biggest content drop we’ve ever done. In fact it was 88 pages of release notes that had to be condensed to what you see below. So without further ado, Let’s get ready to rumble!

Distant Location Rendering System
We’ve added a new distant location rendering system which renders low-polygon versions of locations in Navezgane and Random Gen worlds over a kilometer away. The system creates models of locations above a certain mass and height.

New Locations
We’ve have embellished many old locations with new loot and some custom painting. Too many to mention. We’ve also unlocked a new city in the south east Navezgane desert we call Departure. It’s the largest city so far. We have added over 30 new locations to the game including:

4 new skyscrapers have been added to the game. We’re calling these mega locations vertical dungeons because they play like a traditional game with a lot of thought put into the path, enemy spawning, surprises, even secrets.
3 fast-food restaurants (1 in Navezgane, all 3 in RG)
6 new modern houses (3 in Navezgane all in RG)
Daycare (Both)
Private School (RG only)
Laundromat (Navezgane and RG)
Hair Salon (Navezgane and RG)
2 fire stations (1 Navezgane, both RG)
2 Post Offices (1 Navezgane, both RG)
2 Court Houses (1 Navezgane, both RG)
2 Old business strips (Navezgane and RG)
4 new trailer lots (RG only)
Pawn Shop (Navezgane and RG)
Navezgane Hospital and Football Stadium (added to RG)
New Enemy Spawning and Gamestages
Sleeper Spawning – We’ve gutted the old static spawn system and added a new sleeper spawning system that embeds trigger volumes into locations which are set up by designers.

We’ve added sleeper volumes and spawn points to every location in the game.
Every location has unique spawning appropriate to the location or the area within a location. F.E. a maintenance area will spawn utility worker zombies and an office might spawn businessmen zombies
The amount of zombies spawned at a volume is determined by the spawn definition set by the designer and the definition set in the gamestages.xml regardless of the number of spawn points.
The type of zombies that spawn are determined by the spawn definition it’s set to and the parties game stage. The game will challenge you regardless of your level.
Zombies will spawn in different locations within a pois every play through for a new experience every time.
Zombies at locations are persistent meaning if you entered an area killed 1 of 5 guys and returned you would find the same 4 games alive.
Zombies will respawn in their volume if the volume has never been cleared or nobody has visited it in 5 days
Sleeper zombies have a chance to be a decoy meaning they are already dead. We added this so we could remove the old corpse loot block. Note: you have to damage them first before you can loot them.
Decoy zombies have a chance to not be dead so you can be surprised sometimes
Gamestage increases much faster on higher difficulty levels making zombies big, bad, and bountiful.
Screamer Hordes
We’ve changed screamer hordes to use gamestages now so they will be dynamically set to the offending parties game stage

Game Stage Improvements
We’ve made many changes to make the challenge the advanced players including:

We’ve added feral and radiated zombies to the upper game stages to increase the longer game challenges
7 day horde stages use a larger pool of zombie types, 15 at gamestage 435+
Zombies killed by playerdeath will be added back to the pool
We’ve added a new menu and server config game option to set the number of  zombies per player on Blood moon hordes. It defaults to 8 but can be set to 4, 8, 12, 16, 32 and 64 or any number for server admins. Game-stages are still determined by your party.
With the addition of blood-moon count we changed the Enemy Spawning game option to ON/Off as blood moon count and sleepers control the other spawning system counts
Electricity
We’ve added a complete functional electricity system with a wiring tool, power sources, lights, switches, triggers, traps and more. These items are gated by perks, loot found and trader only items you can buy. They include:

Wire Tool – Use a wire tool to wire electrical components. Focus on any electrical component and use the secondary action to add a wire to a parent and once again to complete the connection to a child component. Focus on any electrical component and use the primary action to remove or cut that components wire to its parent component. With the wire tool equipped you can see many useful things including: a components power usage and power status, the flow of power from parent to its child component and the aiming of objects with motion sensing.
Generator Bank – The Generator Bank allows you to power your electrical components. It requires at least one small engine, expandable up to six. The maximum energy output is determined by the number of small engines installed and their quality. The generator bank uses gas for fuel which can be found in loot and purchased at traders or crafted at chemical stations and campfires.
Solar Bank – The Solar Bank allows you to power your electrical components. It requires at least one solar cell, expandable up to six. The maximum energy output is determined by the number of solar cells installed and their quality. Solar banks produce power during the day when in direct sunlight. Solar Banks and cells can be purchased from traders or found in rare loot.
Battery Bank – The Battery Bank allows you to power your electrical components. It requires at least one battery, expandable up to six. The maximum energy output is determined by the number of batteries installed and their quality. An externally powered and turned on Battery Bank will recharge its batteries. If there are no batteries installed it acts as a relay pushing power down line.
Electric Wire Relay –  The Electric wire relay allows extending your electrical network further with a small cost to power.
Switch – The Switch allows pausing the flow of power to children components.
Pressure Plate – The Pressure Plate triggers the flow of power to children components when stepped on.
Motion Sensor – The Motion Sensor triggers the flow of power to children components when a player or zed is in its view.
Trip Wire Post – The Trip Wire Post triggers the flow of power to children components when a player or zed moves between two connected posts.
Electric Timer Relay – The Electric Timer Relays allows the flow of power to children components during a specified time period in 30 minute increments.
Blade Trap – The Blade trap has three spinning blades that chops players and zeds alike. It does not discriminate.
Electric Fence Post – The Electric Fence Post shocks players and zeds who move between two connected posts.
Dart Trap – The Dart trap launches metal darts when powered.
Auto Turret – The Auto Turret senses targets in its view and fires 9mm rounds at them.
Shotgun Turret – The Shotgun Turret senses targets in its view and fires shotgun shells at them.
Speaker – The speaker plays an alarm sound when powered.
Lights – There are many lights that the player can now craft to illuminate their forts.
Spotlight – The player crafted Spotlight has changed to require power but can now be aimed be where light is needed.
Random Gen Beta Version
We’ve greatly improved Random Gen with many improvements and additions including:

POIs
New RG Distant POIs
Over 30 new locations
We’ve re-organized the rwgmixer.xml and it’s spawning groups and now have every POI spawning as intended
POI location size restrictions have been removed so every location will now be included in possible locations lists. F.e. the football stadium can spawn
POI Picker code improved, ensuring a more even distribution of POIs
POI location facing directions have been fixed so their fronts face roads
POI height is checked against it’s spawn height to ensure it’s not placed too high in the world
Hub Generation
New socket hubs added
City, town, and rural Hubs are now Socket Hubs and spawn based on terrain available
Socket hubs can not only be on hills now but they now have organic overall shapes and look. No more square cities.
Socket hub township type is decided by placed residential buildings using a scoring system
New socket streets to go with socket hubs
New socket street generation formula controllable via rwgmixer.xml
New zoning system to place POIs in certain parts of a town
Downtown zone area percentage parameter added to rules
Terrain Generation
Terrain generation improvements
Terrain generation now adjusts the heights to stay within the bounds without clamping
Biome Generation
Biome dispersion and elevations are improved and more natural.
Biome decoration generator now checks height of prefabs and blocks to ensure it’s not placed too high in the world
Highways
Highways are sexier and have smoother curves
Highways now all have gravel shoulders
Gravel Paths
Gravel paths now use more improved pathfinding
Gravel paths no longer eat out a chunk of the highways they connect to
World previewer
World preview window is now wider
World preview now has fly mode using movement keys when holding right mouse button down
World preview window fly mode speed can be controlled with the mouse wheel
World preview terrain height better reflects actual height
World preview shows random town name using town name generator
Other World Generation and Biome Changes
Biomes have undergone some changes, too.

The gravel spots in biomes are more reliable and will drop 1 unit of the ore they are leading you to.
Stone in the top soil of plains biomes has been replaced by gravel
Individual particle spawners (tree stumps) have been replaced by a biome particle manager so there is no random (and possibly extremely high) concentration of particle generators
Spawning of animals in all biomes has been reworked.
Darkened snow biome sun light a little to reduce whiteout.
You can find small patches of fertilised soil in burnt forest biomes.
You can harvest coal from ember piles and burnt trees.
Surface potassium nitrate in the snow biome is now replaced with oil shale and coal.
Nitrate, oil shale and coal can be found on the surface in the burnt forest.
Added dead trees to the plains.
New Enemies
We’ve added some new zombies and some boss variants to improve game stage challenge. Here they are:

Business man zombie – Often found in corporate locations like the new skyscrapers, these zombies are all about the business of eating you alive. They typically carry cash and paper.
Disturbed Tourist – Everyone loved the old fat Hawaiian shirt tourist zombie so he’s back in HD! Prior to his permanent vacation to the afterlife he was hoarding canned food. Perhaps that is why he was caught and turned into a flesh eater.
New feral zombies – Every zombie in the game now comes with its feral counterpart. Feral zombies always run and have glow in the dark yellow eyes, are much harder to kill and do more damage.
Radiated zombies – There are radiated variants of the fat cops, the spider zombies and the zombie wight ‘the artist formerly known as the feral.’ They have the physical attributes of feral zombies and always run, but also regenerate lost health! They glow with radiation making them unmistakable!
Reworked Enemies
In Alpha 15 we experimented with UMA procedural zombies but they ended up not looking as good as traditionally modeled zombies, and they did not perform as well either so we decided to replace the new UMA zombies with traditionally designed ones. We’ve also redone collision and ragdoll on all enemies for better combat and more believable deaths. The following have been remodeled and redesigned by hand from scratch resulting in scarier hordes and better performance.

Fallen Soldiers
Hazmat male zombie
Biker zombie
Stripper zombie
Utility worker zombie
Team Z Player Football zombie
Motivated Cheerleader zombie
Zombie Cowboy
Zombie Farmer
Zombie Skater punk
Hungry Fat Female zombie
Removed zombies – The miner zombie and the female hazmat zombie have been removed as they didn’t offer enough variance to earn a permanent job at team Z.
Animals
Along with adding new animals and reworking some of the old ones we have added a new fur system. All furry animals now utilize our new fur system which renders a furry coat of realistic looking fur on top of the texture. Here are the new or improved additions:

Grizzly bear – The grizzly bear has been redone from scratch with new meshes, textures and animations. They don’t mess with you unless you get too close to them. They like to habitat in the green forests and snow biomes.
Zombie bears – The zombie bear has been remodeled from the ground up and is meaner than ever. Don’t feed the zombie bears, they only eat human flesh. They are only found in the wasteland and burnt forests.
Wolves – Grey Wolves are a brand new threat to 7 Days. Like the bear, they attack if you get too close to them, and do more damage than zombie dogs but they give up easier. Wolves are found in the green forests, snow biomes and plains.
Dire Wolves – Black with glowing eyes, this wolf is much larger than the grey wolf and is to be feared as they are much more aggressive than any predator. They rarely spawn in the forests and snow biomes, but can roam in packs.
Zombie Vultures – The undead have taken to the skies! These nearly relentless pesky birds stalk the player from the skies and attack without warning. Luckily they  don’t like to be indoors so players can find refuge indoors from them. They are common in all biomes except the green forests.
Rattlesnakes – Rattlesnakes are fairly defensive reptiles but will strike and defend their territory if you get too close to them.
Added: Wandering vulture hordes, wolves, and wolf packs
We’ve also redone collision and ragdoll on all animals for better combat and more believable deaths.
Replaced pigs with wild boars. They attack if provoked.
Painting
Use a paint brush and paint to give your base a custom look. Focus on any paintable block and use the secondary action to paint a surface and the primary action to erase the paint from a surface. Hold the reload key to see additional painting features and change the desired paint color. Unlock additional paint groups by finding and reading painting books. Many new textures have been added to use for painting.

There are many Radial paint options some of which are only available in cheat or creative mode. Radial Options include:

Materials – When this icon is selected the paint selection menu is displayed. Here you can select the paint you want, search for paints, see how much paint per face they cost and see what paints you have unlocked.
Paintbrush  – When this icon is selected the primary action erases a painted block face and secondary action paints a block face.
Roller Icon – Paint or erase a larger area of faces.
Spray-gun – Paint or erase the massive area of faces.
All-sides – Paints all sides of a block face.
Texture Picker – When this icon is selected the paintbrush will be set to the paint that the cursor is focused on if it is unlocked.
Copy Block – Select this icon while focusing on the desired block to copy a stack of painted blocks to your belt.
Replace – Select this icon and the next face you paint in a location will be globally replaced within that location.
Experience, Progression and Skill Changes
Many improvements and changes have gone into the skill system for Alpha 16, including:

You can scroll through all levels of a skill or perk and find out what you will get from it.
You will get less experience for killing zombies but there are a lot more zombies in the world now. In some cases over 100 in a single POI.
You will gain XP from harvesting and farming and better tools or perks can increase that.
Crafting skills are now perks with 10 buy-able levels.
Higher levels of crafting perks require a certain player level.
Armor crafting skills merged into one skill. If it takes duct tape, leather or iron, it’s Armor Crafting. A simple bandana is Misc Crafting.
Low crafting skill tiers yield great benefits for repair degradation. Picking up some of the basics enables you to repair items efficiently. At max crafting skill you have trivial repair degradation.
Electricity recipes are unlocked with a series of Science-based perks.
Both the cost and effect of perks increase at higher tiers so that buying a perk tier gets you an increase proportional to the cost.
The Fixer perk is cheaper and reduces repair degradation by up to 1/3 for all crafting skills.
Crafting firearm ammo requires an anvil and workstation, not calipers. Bullet tips and similar materials do not require a perk.
The tutorial quest gives you enough skill points to actually buy a perk.
The bedroll newbie quest is #1 instead of #7 in the quest chain.
Bad Mechanic perk to increase construction (wrench) harvest amount
Ability to page through skill levels to see attributes and requirements for any skill level
Science and Painting skill categories
Upgrading farmland with fertilizer provides XP.
Repairing or upgrading a block now gives XP based on materials used multiplied by their count
Harvesting a block now gives xp based on item materials gained
Planting crops gives block material exp
Crafting skills are now buy-only. You still gain level XP for crafting and repairing
Master weaponsmiths can craft machetes
Most perk requirements lowered because players should never have skill points and nothing to buy with them
You can craft/scrap/repair with leather without buying a Leather Tanning perk
Crafting advanced workstations uses the science skill
The Knife Guy and Miner69er perks increase harvest amount at the higher tiers
Adjusted perk costs to reflect crafting and other skill changes
Both the cost and effect of perks increase at higher tiers so that buying a perk tier always gets you roughly the same proportional increase
The Fixer perk is cheaper and reduces repair degradation by up to 1/3 for all crafting skills
Low crafting skill tiers yield great benefits for repair degradation. Picking up some of the basics enables you to repair items efficiently. At max crafting skill you have zero repair degradation
The Secret Stash perk is the only way to see the highest trader stash level.
Skill screen allows purchase of multiple skills at once.
Skill screen now shows — for cost of maxed out skills.
Skill points gained per level have been increased to 6.
Changed: Misc crafting is now a perk.
Full Gamepad/Controller Support
We’ve added full gamepad/controller support and tested for Xbox One, PS4 and Steam controllers. The controls are not definable but are the same as the console version defaults. They even have custom button icon prompts that display when using a controller. Note that on-screen keyboard for text fields will only be available when the game is started from Steam’s Big Picture Mode.

This also includes updated windows as well as keyboard hotkeys for actions on items.

New Recipes
There are new recipes for building blocks, traps, electric devices and resources.

Bulletproof glass is tough but can only be “repaired” with a completely new block
Several material tiers got expanded to new shapes.
Loose Boards Traps
Jail door
Wedge corners
Stairs corner
Rounded blocks and corners
Molotov cocktail
New Items (Lootable/Harvestable/For Sale)
We have added new items you can get by looting, harvesting or purchase from traders.

Paint magazines to unlock paint groups for the paint brush.
Said paint brush.
Compound bow, which is more accurate than a wooden bow or crossbow and fires faster than a crossbow.
New Creative Block Shapes
We have added new block shapes for the creative builders to use and improved the placement mechanics. Here are a few of the many highlights.

Frame blocks show proper backfaces which makes them easier to place correctly
Damaged concrete and wood blocks
Both centered and non-centered iron bars.
Cars automatically pick random colors based on their x/y position
I-beam blocks
Arch shape
Cube cutout backfaces shape
wedge60_corner
3D ladders
3D ramp frame shape
Cube eighth shape
billboard_centered shape
Box collision to ramp frame
Curved wall 3x3x1
Concrete destroyed 05,06,07
wedge60 inside corner set
Wedge stairs with recipes and upgrade path.
Block Rotation and UV Improvements
In order to add painting and fix a lot of bad UVS we’ve unified block and model rotations.

Every building block can now be rotated to all 24 rotations some special model ones still have 28 for 45 degree  ground rotations
Blocks can have a “handle face” orientation, defaulting to sticking a certain side of this block to whatever surface you are pointing at.
All place-able blocks now have radial options to improve placement including:
Simple Rotation – rotates the basic 4 on the ground plane
Advanced Rotation – rotates all 24-28 rotations
On Face – Rotates on the face your cursor is focused on
Auto – rotates away from you automatically. This tag is only on some blocks like ramps and stairs
Copy Rotation – Copies the rotation your focused on to the stack your holding.
Land Claim Improvements

We’ve increased the default size of land claims to 41 to work with electricity and coming Alpha 17 settlement features.
Our general block placement colors have been changed to following: Green inside your claim, Yellow inside your friends claim, White everywhere else, Red cannot place block.
Made block placement glow grid double sided so you can see it from underneath too
You can pickup and move electrical components and work stations inside your claim.
Electrical Items outside of your claim can be cut and wired by strangers
New Stealth System
Stealth 2.0 is more flexible and allows for more varied zombie behaviors.

Things that affect how a player is detected:
Player Light Level (world lighting and equipped items)
Player Stance (Standing or Crouched)
Player Motion
Noise
Smell (carrying fresh meat is not ideal for sneaking around zombies)
Distance
Zombies have varying stats both for the zombie type and individuals.
Some see better than others, some hear better than others, some smell be… actually they all smell bad but you get the idea.
A sleeping zombie may or may not growl a bit when it’s close to waking up.
Which way a sleeping zombie is looking does matter.
If you clear an area completely it will take several days to respawn. If you don’t and leave it will respawn quickly.
Placed (active) bedrolls prevent sleeper respawns in a… range
…now defined in serverconfig.xml (BedrollDeadZoneSize)
To zombies, held torches are the least noticeable light source. Then come gun lights, flashlights, and the mining helmet is the most noticeable.
New Weapons and Weapon Improvements

Molotov cocktail craftable by player. Be the life of the party and light zombies and players on fire. Player recipe included.
Compound bow with parts and loot list entries. Required to use steel and flaming arrows. Loot only.
Weapon Sight In & Out. Pistol, Mp5 and Ak47 have reworked iron sights for more accurate aiming, and have new fire sounds. All weapons have an aim in and aim out sound now too.
Added local impact sounds for distant shots scored. This allows you to know when you scored a distant hit.
Improved bow, crossbow aim and iron sighting no longer shows crosshair. Compound bow has range sights.
All weapons have hip fire accuracy now. Hip fire is less accurate than iron sights.
Accuracy overhaul for all ranged weapons.
Minibike Improvements 
Minibikes now show an icon on the map and compass for the person who placed the chassis or attached the lock to it to avoid losing them in the wild.

How minibike parts are processed, decreasing processing time from 2ms to 0.5ms
Fix for minibike vanishing and falling through the world
Client will receive minibike NRE when someone in the game rides a bike
NRef in GUIHUDStealthInfo.cs when quitting while sitting on a minibike
Minibike NRE when leaving and reentering game from main menu
Minibike chassis placement dupe
Added

Broken girder beams in the wasteland are now a block shape instead of a model
New rusty texture for girder beams and rusty metal
New block rustyMetalWall
4 new beards to character selection menu
Iron bars and iron bars centered
Flannel shirt item, also used by arechtype MadMole
Flannel shirt variations and loot entries
Stairs filled corner shape
Add buffs to explosions
New quarter cube shape
Generic craftable storage crate
Support for binding CapsLock
Keyboard hotkeys for item actions
Keypad divide (‘/’) toggles invisible mode (SP only!)
Step trash sound variety
DOF for focussed views, like staring at a rock while you chop it
Concrete terrain block
Show password checkbox to password dialog, password hidden by default
A full spectrum of paintable drywall/concrete textures
Loose floorboards that break away when you walk over them
Ramp corner cutout shape
Grey and dark grey paints
Hit sound when hurting players, zombies or animals about 10 meters or further away
cube_glass shape that hides inside faces
Plywood texture for new construction and boarded up windows
improved fog performance
Washing machine and trash compactor loot containers
Added a bookstore and car parts shipping / loot crate
Added a Construction Site loot and random container
Security gate plate
Business glass plate and curved plate for counters and such
Commercial blinds shape and textures
New archetype Richie, a well groomed businessman
Several new random car colors: dark green, dark blue, beige and black
New character preset Roxy
Focus search fields in windows with “F”
Lockable, craftable wall drawer
New Destroyed bridges over forked river east of and leading to the new departure city
Broken workstation blocks (for prefabs) that can be looted or harvested for parts.
Hidden Stash (hero) shipping crate + loot container for prefabs
Lab equipment shipping crate + loot container for prefabs
new round ladder model for metal ladders.
burnt biome reference to the farming journal entry.
Workstation journal entries: added info on items having to be in your inventory
Broken workstation blocks (for prefabs) that can be looted or harvested for parts.
Helper blocks to randomly spawn a working or busted workstation.
Hidden Stash (hero) shipping crate + loot container for prefabs.
Lab equipment shipping crate + loot container for prefabs.
New round ladder model for metal ladders.
Added Broken Battery Bank, Broken Generator Bank.
Added recipe for Loose Boards Plate 1×1
Random stations spawners to some locations in the world which spawn a random station in working or destroyed condition.
Bookstore boxes to bookstores, lab boxes to pharmacies and auto parts boxes to auto locations.
Heat to wall torches
Business Glass Pane (Trap) + Business Glass Centered.
Added Arch 2m blocks/recipes.
Recipes for glass ramps.
New HD flagstone texture and replaced old one.
Changed

You can harvest plant fibers from grassy terrain blocks
Plant fibers can be harvested more efficiently with a hoe
Reduced crafting time on cottonPlant
Rebalanced harvest events of cars
Zombie limb dismemberment rebalanced
When digging up fertilized farmland there is a chance to harvest fertilizer
Making glue does not require cooked water
Multiple seeds can be planted by holding down the mouse button and moving down the row and the placement cursor is always on, making targeting easier
Increased hit points of vending machines
When a loot container is destroyed a bag with the content is dropped instead of individual items
Overbright mining helmet light set back to 1x intensity instead of 2x
Grate block removed
Moldy Bread is a science crafting item
Fat zombie cops are bigger
Zombie soldiers are less generous with the rocket launchers
Shotguns only have one schematic
Increased the amount of ammo that traders carry
Low quality weapon parts are more durable and effective
Maple Forest biome grass, added specular channel to grass. Adjusted spectrums, added sparse pine trees.
Grass normals now have a 10% direction to them in order to catch better specular lighting
Renamed assembly tip title from Gun Assembly to Item Assembly
Mass/SI values adjusted to be more consistent and easier to understand
Available gamestages increased by 50% to make the life of high level players more interesting
Corn plants are 3 blocks high at every growth stage. Every other farm crop (including mushrooms) is 2 blocks high
Updated glass to better high res texture
Replaced shower glass with new tiling gen glass
Sun angle is now SE to NW
Updated decayed b texture, redwood fence texture and scrap iron walls to HD versions
Auger and chainsaw parts are less rare
Increased chance to find forged iron and steel in loot
Reduced block damage of explosive bolts to be in line with pipe bombs
Poncho and bellows are made from leather
Poncho renamed to Leather Poncho because the animal hide armor is the “warm and furry” armor
There are 5 scrap armor schematics instead of one McDyver book
Quality level loss from repairs has been lowered
Slightly lower slowdown from barbed wire fences
Increased the availability of padlocks
Preview placement block is fully opaque
Burnt Frame used on roofs can be upgraded
Street light metal is less shiny and more rusty
Reduce light intensity on mining helmet and minibike to match flashlight
Some tool damage and block health values rebalanced
Most block destroy events moved to harvest events
Block/Entity Harvesting overkill now provides bonus resources
The tutorial quest gives you enough skill points to buy the cheapest perk
Stone in the top soil of plains biomes has been replaced by gravel
The gravel tendrils that lead down to ore veins spawn more consistently and they always drop 1 piece of the ore you would find below
Better tools (steel instead of iron tools) will harvest considerably more resources from the same block
Increased stack size of mass resources like rocks
You can place the claim block farther away so you can see the size of the affected area
Evenly distribute load for block ticking over multiple frames
Calipers are not required for crafting ammo. Bullet tips and similar materials do not require a perk
Improved sniper zoom animation
Expanded scout / sleeper group with the new radiated / feral zombies
Rebalanced and extended gamestage lists to allow higher difficulty for groups of players
Made sandstorm effect more grainy
Made the biome snow “smoke” a bit more noisy
Removed old treestump blocks that create snow, smoke and sandstorms now that we have procedurally placed particle effects
First round check for flat space, if no town area is found, use the more liberal per cell height diff check
Widened highways to 10 to match socket roads
Mirror texture has no black wood trim, but is now seamless for full length mirrors
Town/City street axioms to allow for more growth
Adjusted placement range of cars
You can scrap a blood draw kit into plastic
The car is now simply labeled “Sedan”
Redid low res creme drywall and creme drywall baseboard textures
Use game GUID for local save cache folder so it properly “resets” when another server with the same game name is joined or the server is reset but keeps the game name
Darkened moonlight in wasteland biome
Rain sky and fog when raining
Stainless steel texture is bigger and better
Updated stainless fridge top and bottom textures
Water textures
Improve a couple destroy shapes
Thickened fog and trees in burnt forest
Darkened snow biome sun light a little to reduce whiteout
Increased chance for spawning of bears
Shipping / loot crates use a standard texture now, allowing for more varied loot distribution
Better framerate reflections that include distant terrain
Requirements now reflect currently viewed level
Level text on requirements to “Player Level”
Attributes in locked levels, grey out just like req
Only show unlocked recipes for currently shown skill level
Wood/metal desks support blocks again
Rebalanced sensitivity of land mines and explosives to damage and other explosives
Now using “sack dropped” for each dropped block as model
Misc Crafting group icon now changed to match the misc crafting skill icon
Reairing a block is cheaper than building it new
Crafting skills have 10 buyable levels
Removed old hornet assets
Max camera control pitch is -80 to 80 instead of -90 to 90
Both concrete and reinforced concrete need time to harden after being placed
Handguns and shotguns are pretty accurate when fired from the hip and are more accurate if you aim
Rifles are less accurate when fired from the hip and very accurate when aimed
Less loot is found on zombies
Finding whole guns is more common than finding parts. Traders carry more guns and ammo.
Cars now angle with terrain
Socket town roads now use trimming to blend with the surrounding terrain
Bow weapons have wider crosshairs
Bows now sway unless iron sighted
Loose gun parts that you find are generally higher quality than whole guns
Shotgun wound buff slightly tweaked upwards
Increased fire rate of 9mm pistol and animation speed
Increased dead body hit points so corpses don’t turn to blocks before they hit the ground
Increased firearm durability by 25-40%
Mp5 and ak iron sighting is more snappy
Updated night vision effect
Feral zombies spawn at night in the wasteland Note that they can survive the night and be active during the day
Main building blocks, doors, and hatches use passthrough damage on downgrades
It is now not possible any more to place a plant seed if there is not enough light for this plant to grow
Corpse blocks now destroy to a torso instead of a backpack.
Dead zombie ragdolls last longer and have more hit points to destroy. When destroyed they downgrade to a block zombie corpse. The block zombie corpse will degrade to nothing over time instead of a rib cage. If the block zombie corpse has loot in it and is destroyed, it will spawn a rib cage model that contains the loot instead of a backpack.
Desaturated the plains sun a little, darkened the ground texture and grass.
Splint requires now requires cloth, wood and duct tape to craft
Shadow flickers at far locations – Adjusted shadow cascade distances, near clip plane, and fixed near/far shadow option values to reduce shadow flickering when you’re far from position (0,0).
Increased zombie dog health, they are too easy to kill now that the glitchy spinning is fixed and nerfed wolf health
Updated forest biome art
Updated sand texture
Farming: Partially grown crops can be harvested for 1 seed.
Suppress the impact sound on blocks if the hit also destroys the block
Torches are made with animal fat (no cooking pot required)
Torches and candles placed on walls will eventually attract zombies
Heat value (attracting screamer zombies) of forges and campfires reduced by 25%
Thinned amount of tree stumps in the snow biome
Adjusted Trader secret stash inventories
All ammo items have been labeled (Ammo) so they can be searched for
Moved drop toolbelt item to G, godmode to Q
all campsites and army locations to use camo and other paints for variety. Two large campsites are now army campsites
You can no longer invest skill points in the Misc Crafting skill
Overalls are now made from cloth
Slowed player leveling.
Some wood harvest amounts reduced and fuel value increased
Increased hit points of valuable workstations so they are not destroyed accidentally.
Cooking stews is more expensive but more rewarding.
Healing from eating food has been reduced in general.
You start with a claim stone in single player because it now enables the pick-up ability for certain blocks.
Updated the abandoned houses to use a variety of siding and roofing textures
Increased the cost of claim stones
All trader locations now have a working version of every station workbench, forge, chemistry station and cement mixer. All non trader locations stations have been replaced with a random station spawner where they have a small chance to be a good station and a greater chance to be a broken station which can be looted and harvested for parts.
Workstations can no longer be fully harvested with a wrench. Inside of a land claim area you can pick up workstations placed by a player.
Gave banks the new bullet proof glass.
Slower bloodmoon fade 6:00PM-10:00PM
Cooking stews is more expensive but more rewarding.
Healing from eating food has been reduced in general.
You start with a claim stone in single player because it now enables the pick-up ability for certain blocks.
Increased hit points of valuable workstations so they are not destroyed accidentally.
Slowed player leveling per level.
Reduced the wood cost of tools and weapons.
The stone axe works better against wood and worse against stone. (it’s an axe, not a pick)
Increased player outgoing damage on higher difficulty levels. On “Insane” it is now x0.5 instead of x0.25.
Cobblestone frames no longer exist. Flagstone can be upgraded to cobblestone.
More flagstone block recipes added.
The adobe material has been removed from the game. Flagstone has been fleshed out with new shapes.
Small adjustment to bacon & eggs to match the latest changes
Increased insulation of skull cap, hooded sweatshirt and sweatshirt.
Concrete blocks use the reinforced concrete icon.
Tightened up iron sight sway and bob. Now when iron sighting your weapon is in the “aimed” position faster.
Removed adobe recipes and blocks.
Reduced sloppy weapon sway when rotating camera and looking up and down, resulting in guns feeling tighter. This also reduces the stuttering feeling A15 had when mouse looking.
Clearer message for “unable to repair.
All stations found at traders now have a rare chance to be in working condition.
Calipers no longer drop in the game.
Crafting steel ingots or bulletproof glass in a forge requires a crucible upgrade.
The machete recipe is unlocked by a perk for better visibility.
First aid kits are made in a chem station.
First aid bandages heal more slowly.
Altered the Taza’s Axe icon.
The burning barrel is not craftable.
Every Secret Stash perk level will improve the trader inventory.
Crawler zombies will not appear in scout or feral hordes.
Claim stones require forged iron, not steel.
Increased temperature insulation and armor on Animal hide clothing
Removed calipers from the game.
Removed spotlights from random construction loot crates.
Iron tools drain more stamina than stone tools. This can easily be covered with perks.
Everyone can repair a machete but only expert weaponsmiths can craft new ones.
A machete is a steel weapon.
Game Unsticks player to the surface when underground
Allow for case insensitive item name passed to giveself
Increased probability for finding silver/gold/diamond.
Making glue does not require a beaker.
The bio fuel item has been removed.
Crafting sod is cheaper.
“<player> has joined the game” chat message is shown when the player is really in the world
Default day length to 60 minutes, day light to 18 hours
Added stamina mod to the Bad Mechanic perk.
Switched back to OS cursor
Increased stack size on iron darts.
Cap overdamage on block harvest
Better wording for the food healing message.
Fixed

Running shoes can be scrapped
Chrysanthemum seeds can not be found in loot
The pistol skill does not make clear that it also covers revolvers
Vending machines are limited to a x8 claim modifier
Removed stray vertex from shantywall collision
Underground caves cause blocks above them to collapse
Rain effects fixed on signs placed indoors
IOException when deleting a saved game
Cars misaligned on slopes
Open locked doors need abiltiy to be closed by all
Duplicate any item in zombie corpse
Screen flickering during daytime lightning
Vending machines covered in snow indoors
Block placement too opaque
Not ignited Dynamite does not blow up after nearby explosion
Window03 getting occluded by water
Glass windows in hospital outlining terrain behind them
Distance between players is not updated when user is in Players tab
Player can drop items into walls and be unable to retrieve them
Now playing interactive sounds at the position of the target block
Car windows not getting snow cover
The player is able to pick up items not focused in POI
Character has to be in water in order to drink from it
Crouching affects open/close volume levels
No “Collect item” prompt is displayed on dropped Stone Shovel
Increasing server heap by shooting rockets at ground of lake
Dupe items using full backpack and lootcontainer
Player is able to upgrade and destroy blocks simultaneously
Concrete mixers are 1 block high but require 2
Excessive journal tip links removed from items, missing ones added
Campfire Dupe from forum and youtube find
Audio getting cut off before finished
An MP5 would not normally use 10mm ammo
Concrete Mix bucket model looks the same as Bucket of Water after dropping
Consumable items can be substituted with another while being used
Container Sorting – Not functional in Minibike Storage
Container Sorting – Stacks of same blocks are not sorted together in Container or Backpack
Client in a multiplayer game does not receive Harvesting Resources note after killing an animal
Pistol cannot be picked up after being dropped
Auger falling through world
Iron Desk Stability is different than Wood Desk
Scrap metal log spike yields wood upon destruction
Dupe assembly items with sorting button
Crafting queue does not advance after slot is cancelled
Incorrect collision detection on Minibike
Ammo amount indicator does not appear after respawning while wielding a weapon
Death of the player’s character does not affect the number of spawned zombies during horde as intended
Missing Accuracy and Range stats for certain ranged weapons
Crosshair is visible for Rocket Launcher whilst aiming down sight
Rocket Launcher unaffected by Range and Accuracy stats listed
Placed decorative blocks may partially sink in the surface
Spending Skill Points Journal Entry added only after completing Basic Survival Quest
Zombiespawn is triggered in owned POI by players w/o bedroll in it
Mouse sensitivity can no longer be set to 0
The player may get stuck in the wall after dismounting minibike
DOF for distant terrain
More severe description of the thirst/hunger effect that actually does damage
Chunks may not stream for certain players, also affecting mobs
Terrain artifacts may appear after removing large portions of ground
Zombie moan playing when they’re knocked out or dead
Impact sounds not playing quieter when crouched
Disappearing eyelashes while wearing particular headgear
Jewelry disappearing when wearing a hat
Missing drowning audio
Animal Hide Leg Armor is not displayed on character model
Terrain mismatch causes blocks not to render ( A15 & A16 )
Explosion does not affect the roof correctly
Using a bow results in multiple arrows being visible from another Player’s perspective
Some errors and potential NREs in networking if disconnected during login phase
Doors and undamaged windows do not keep the rain out
Many objects not getting snow cover
Grass tips missing snow
Lightning & Thunder on Dedicated Servers
Thunder synced between clients in MP games
Player dropped Backpack cannot be looted in shallow water
SetTraderArea can now also be used to remove a trader area protection
DeathCam persists after getting kicked off MP games
Water reflections flickering when camera near water surface
Assigned the relevant crafting skills to weapon parts
Wrong sound on one of the blood bag actions
Terrain has missing textures and black areas
Signs cannot be picked up once dropped
Terrain clipping exploit
Cement description is misleading
Duping bug using facial piercings
Bypassing loot timer by aborting loot progress
treeDeadShrub has wrong hitbox
You can place a bedroll in spaces too small to spawn a player
Socket Road LSystems not properly returning to last save point
Haybale is not repairable
Gas can and fuel barrel are smeltable in forges
Bow descriptions show compatible arrow types
Bugs with trees and crops
Animals won’t die from land mines while playing on dedi or as client on P2P
Ramp / inside corner frames do not have backfaces
Chemistry station not getting correct indoor/outdoor weather values
Fridge audio playing after quitting game
Snow on glass fix
Sun/Moon pop in movement on clients of MP games
Raw but fresh food has a lower chance for food poisoning than rotten/moldy food
Flaming arrows are ineffective if the target is on fire already
Items can be thrown through hatch’s collision box
Metal railing downgrades to wood railing
Shooting through lower part of the frame may cause projectile to go under the ground texture
The player can loop use animation of specific consumables and delay correct use of them
For each out of sync in network writing of Chunk
Old Sofas has incorrect icon and different name in creative menu
No icon when you pick up seeds while harvesting trees
Added send-backoff on errors for Steam networking
Change Hazmat Shirt into a Hazmat Jacket to prevent clipping issues
Wrong side textures on windowPlug blocks
Assigned correct (new) cutout shapes to frame blocks
Disappearing faces on wedge60 cutout
Table doesn’t hide itself
Some windows or wooden window frames have the wrong material type
stairs_filled_quarter_vertical_uv collision and zombie pathing
Timing on zombie hand attacks
Chalkboard is spelled incorrectly
Player unable to pass through wedge corner railings
Terrain concrete is too white
Road lineup issues in towns
Prefab heights in towns
Various other regeneration related issues
Blend not working
Highways not lining up in some cases
Limited bumpiness and cliffs on upward and downward turns
Collision on resource rock ID# 630
Wood frames durability is unequal
Unintentional air gap in flooded basement
Highways no longer connecting to other highways
Highways going to center of hub by default
Water holes in RWG due to road ending
Incorrect/missing fall events on some doors and log spikes
(Most) Navezgane Bridges are having SI issues
Sandbags are missing repair/harvest properties
Secure Reinforced Door collapsing into iron debris
Secure Reinforced Door and Metal Reinforced door do not turn into debris
Reinforced Wood Metal Log Spike3 does not leave debris after collapsing
Food Poisoning debuff is not refreshed when reapplied
Using delete key in input fields on Linux causes malformed strings
Cleaned up old corpses. We now have decoys
Removed duplicate sight from shotgun mesh
Wrong sound when using a blood bag
Outdated hit point values on some blocks/materials
Improve map colors
Water bottle icon showing incorrectly in character tool belt after filling
Fridges had doors on both sides
Keep populating server list after sorting
No floating “crafted” HUD icon with CustomIcon
When leaving game with attachable wire in hand – on rejoin the wire runs to 0,0,0
Farming feature suffers from a number of issues
Player is able to place cooking tools when UI shows padlock
Death animation disabled when alt tabbing during death
Breaking down a car on the sloped road will create a hole in the world
Some clothes and armors are lacking Waterproof statistic
Skill requirements of perks do not display localised string
Info window level starting at 0
All explosive ammo and mines use the Science crafting skill
Concrete and steel blocks have reversed explosion resistance
Zombie gore causes a blockage on catwalk, prevents zombies from advancing
Snowberry poisoning is causing wellness number to be too lengthy
Skill menu search function does not cover localized strings
Stack overflow exception when starting a new seed
Hunting Rifle has small zoom available
Bear had no collision or ragdoll
3rd person clipping into main player camera when opening camera control window
Fix nightvision/miningLight double activate issue when holding a gun with no flashlight enabled
The UI shows incorrect weapon damage
Healing items can be used to identify decoy sleepers
Snowberry poison / blood draw kit buff lasts through player death
Audio – shotgun repeat rate fix
AK47 firing sounds
Many zombies material was set too dark
Exception in ItemValue Constructor
ArgumentOutOfRangeException on specific sign use
Cancelling bow and compound bow shots is now smooth and animates back to the idle position naturally instead of a lag and instant pop
Unisex Hair Raider rendering issues
Dev-flagged pickup frames and other “game mode” items like secure storage chests
Increased maxAlive scaling on gamestaged spawns. Both maxAlive and the max zombie / player menu setting act as max caps.
Distant terrain with holes in Navezgane
Raider hair overlay
Removed deprecated properties from sounds.xml
Zombie triggered car explosion doesn’t kill zombies
MP5 front sight is below the crosshair mark
Fix zombie run offset from dusk/dawn stinger
Issue where client skills wouldn’t clear out when joining a server
Fix glass icons transparency making them chopped up
Cannot shoot through certain Iron Bar (1126) rotations with guns – RWG
Session temp freezes when cancelling large recipe counts
INF Hub Cell does not exist at grid position 0, 1 for client
Incorrect values are shown in “Gun Smithing” skill
Large Welcome Sign Prefab seems to defy physics
Horde difficulty does not adjust correctly for a party with multiple players together
When new players join a dedi (day 77 ) the gamestage recalculates, gives only 1 zed each
Excessive harvest quantities
Block placement rotating when pausing the game.
Vehicle data saving on clients
Localization not working when game is not installed in Steam client
zombie transition from walk to idle and vise versa not smooth
Add zombies killed by playerdeath back to the pool
Marker not showing for clients when first placing minibike
Unmanned minibike triggers tripwire
Red paint showing on distant lod damaged cars
Secret Stash does not require Barter skill
Typo in cotton description, form should be from
un-needed railings in oil refinery
change color placement to red if the player blocks it
Decoration Replacing Light Pole Base in Nav a tp -1660 61 772
Fixed: Added burnt biome reference to the farming journal entry.
Fixed: Workstation journal entries: added info on items having to be in your inventory
Fixed: Audio clips not stopping upon leaving a game
Fixed: SDTD-6556 Audioloop possible on auto fire tools/weapons – when emptying a clip with no ammo
Game settings, command line, command console

Allow overriding the Steam language with the “-language=” command line argument
Launcher switch for exclusive fullscreen mode on Windows (“-window-mode exclusive”)
Allow EAC to be put in debug mode on servers with “-debugeac” flag
Console command “visitmap” to generate chunks and minimap contents
Console command “givequest” prints list of available quests if none given, also preventing an NRE when given an invalid quest name
Print IP of client to log on connect
ini support – location is in the same folder as Saves for your saved games.  It will be auto-generated and filled once you exit the game, if it doesn’t exist. When hitting apply in the graphics options it should not overwrite your ini settings unless you specifically set those settings, or change Graphics Quality, in the graphics options menu. The default graphics options have been adjusted for better general performance.
Modding

Allow parameters to be passed to XUi controls as well as using them in simple calculations
Added “-debugxui” and “-debugxui=verbose” arguments to show XUi related warnings while loading, especially with control instantiation
Added a server side log entry “PlayerSpawnedInWorld” when a player actually spawned, as well as the according ModAPI event
Data/Config/Stealth.txt documents the stealth system and how to adjust it
Biome Particle Manager – Biomes.xml can now specify particle effects to play per biome with a few variables for count and placement.  The BiomeParticleManager syncs all clients together and the particle effects are saved and loaded per game.  Exact location of the effects is mostly “random”, but synced between clients, while still only playing the effects within its correct biome.  More effects are spawned per biome a few seconds after players enter new biomes or every 5 minutes or so per client, but spawn count won’t go above the specified max in the biomes.xml file per effect, per biome, world-wide.
Reworked a bunch of the internal prefab editor features and UI to get closer to a prefab / world editor for public use
Servers / Config

“EnemySpawnMode” serverconfig setting is now true/false
“EnemySenseMemory” serverconfig setting has been removed
Added “BloodMoonEnemyCount” setting (Adjust this to get more enemies per player on blood-moons if your game stage is high enough. Game-stages are still determined by your party)
Added “BedrollDeadZoneSize” setting (This is a 3 dimensional unit in meters from bedrolls that blocks zombie spawning.  Including zombies spawned from biomes, screamer hordes, blood moon hordes and even sleeper volumes that are within this distance.)
Allow overriding serverconfig settings via command line (“-settingname=value”)
Added “HideCommandExecutionLog” to disable printing of command execution to the server log
Limit of per player uncovered map area configurable with preference “MaxUncoveredMapChunksPerPlayer”, client side defaults to 4 times the area of before A16 (128 km² instead of 32 km²)
Support reserved slots (“ServerReservedSlots” and “ServerReservedSlotsPermission” settings) as well as admins joining the server even if already full (“ServerAdminSlots” and “ServerAdminSlotsPermission” settings)
Known Issues

Electric Fences do not have a unique buff yet this is coming in A17
On-screen keyboard is only available if you start the game from Steam’s Big Picture Mode
Smell is not working with the new stealth we will revisit it in a17
Once you are hunted, it takes along time for them to lose interest and your position.
Advanced rotations of doors and hatches are offset incorrectly.
Mac OS has a rendering overlay bug.
Mac OS distance building render too dark.
Linux OS distant water has missing texture.